The Boss
===
Robert Coover
===
The gunman lights a cigarette, watches despondently as dusk falls upon the empty alley. He is alone in a lonely place, summoned here to receive instructions from a master criminal known only as the Boss, but the Boss isn’t here. No one is. It’s spooky. He feels like a marked man. The Boss is known for his ruthlessness. When he orders a killing, someone dies. The gunman would like there to be witnesses for what happens next, but the alley’s deserted.

He glances at his watch, a gift from the Boss. Face a gold coin, no numbers. A joke, probably: time is money. Or, maybe, money is time; it depends on what you’re short of. The Boss is a great joker. The watch hands are hair-thin, like the edge of a razor blade, hard to see, especially in this fading light. There and not there, like time itself. Which is perhaps not being clocked—perhaps that’s what the numberless face is saying. How can you measure the shit you’re buried in? He doesn’t know what keeps the watch running. Battery inside, maybe. When the battery dies? Don’t think about it.

On one assignment or another, the gunman has wasted a few suckers in alleys like this, but not many. His specialty is knocking them off in train stations and hotel lobbies or on the street in broad daylight. There’s a greater risk of getting nabbed, so always an extra thrill. Which is why he took up doing the Boss’s dirty work. Thrills remind him that he’s alive, when not much else does.

Overhead, a street lamp comes on, its yellow light a mere stain under the dimming sky. Then a woman passes. It’s about time, the gunman thinks. Has she been sent by the Boss? Is she his witness? His victim? His executioner? His hand is inside his jacket, resting on the butt of the revolver holstered under his armpit. Probably just an innocent working girl, looking for a pickup, wandering into a place where she doesn’t belong. Which wouldn’t stop the Boss from targeting her. Or using her.

You looking for someone, sister? he asks, lurking in the shadows, his cigarette bobbing as he speaks.

I don’t know, she says. She casts an inquisitive gaze at him, then quickly looks away. A signal? He should perhaps throw himself behind the trash cans, but her tender scrutiny has fixed him where he stands.

She walks slowly away into the shadows at the far end of the alley, then swivels and walks back again toward the light. She appears frightened, lost. Touchingly vulnerable. Above her, the street lamp sways rhythmically, causing shadows to stretch and recede, stretch and recede, like a slowly beating heart. She pauses under it and looks around, clearly thinking about something. She’s no beauty, but she has sweet ways. His hard heart softens. He takes his hand off the revolver.

When she turns to walk down the alley again, the gunman flicks his cigarette away and walks with her, moving as she moves. Left, right, left . . . it’s a kind of dance. She asks if he’s making fun of her. He says he doesn’t know how to make fun. In truth, he feels caught up in something fundamental. Benumbing. A feeling he hasn’t had before. Abstract, yet oddly erotic.

It won’t do any good, she says, reading him.

Yeah, I know, lady. But I like it.

They reach the dark end of the alley, still moving together, and turn back toward the swaying street lamp. The alley seems almost to fade away, the lamp’s glow to brighten. There are bats twittering somewhere. Time itself seems to stop, even though he knows it’s still grinding inexorably toward something messy. The Boss has plans that haven’t happened yet. Never mind. Worry about them when they do.

When their dance ends, night has fully descended, sharpening the contrast between the pool of lamplight they have stepped into and the rest of the world, lost in the darkness beyond. That was great, he says. She looks up at him, her face pale but radiant in the light. She nods. Her sad smile seems to say, Yes, but it’s not enough, is it? She stares down at her feet, and when she does so, her face is masked in shadow. Is she about to betray him? he wonders. Does he care?

She starts suddenly, glances back down the alley. He follows her gaze. Uh-oh. Something is moving. His hand, too slowly, is inside his jacket. Watch out! she cries, and throws herself in front of him. A shot rings out. She collapses into his arms. Holding her, he fires impotently into the darkness. His bullets ricochet through the alley like ironic laughter. Hang on, baby! he pleads, but it’s too late.

It must be . . . why . . . she whispers, and dies in his arms.

His heart hardens again. Rage bites at the corners of his eyes. He doesn’t understand a fucking thing.