The Mirror
===
David Hoon Kim
===
She was the star pupil, extroverted, the teacher’s favorite; I was in my third year, unsure of myself, my life, and everything in between. I met her in an Ibsen module at Copenhagen University. She always sat in the front row and spent the hour diligently taking notes, or giving answers before anyone else could during the tutorial sessions. I, too, knew the answers but I didn’t say them out loud; instead, I waited for someone else to speak. More often than not, she was that person. When she spoke, her “e,” “a,” and “æ” vowels were a little too crisp, a little too clean-sounding, like the rigsdansk of some bygone TV presenter.

We were the only Asians, two dark spots among the bright blond heads of varying shades, and I wondered if she had also been adopted by Danish parents, as was the case with many Asians in Denmark, brought up to think of themselves as Danish. The only thing Asian about us was our birth, and, of course, our appearance. Over the years, I had met a number of others like me: the first when I was fourteen, during a class trip to Paris; the second in my first year of university; another was presented to me at a Friday bar by a mutual friend; and a fourth, an adoptee from Norway, had been a kollegium floor-mate. Mette Honoré, Helle Nielsen, Mia Kjærsgaard, Unn Fahlstrøm. With each, things had never gone beyond the initial conversation, an exchange of backgrounds. I hadn’t given any of them much thought since our respective encounters, but I didn’t forget their names, which all belonged to Korean-born Scandinavian girls.

At first glance, Ditte seemed to fit the same mold. On the last day of class, I found her waiting for me in the corridor outside the auditorium. Up to then, she had behaved as if I wasn’t there, though she must have noticed me the same way I had noticed her. In the tone of someone who has rehearsed her words beforehand, she asked me if I wanted to get a beer at the cafeteria. As we walked in silence, I thought I knew what was coming. After all, I had been through this before with other adoptees. Like them, she was surprised when I told her that I had been born in Japan, not Korea. I wasn’t her first adoptee, but the ones she had met thus far had been girls. I was, in a manner of speaking, her first boy. I learned that we had arrived in Denmark at the ages of five months and six months, respectively. We were both a year younger than our fellow-students, who had, in the Danish tradition, taken a sabbatical year to work or travel.

Was she really all that different from the other Korean girls I had met? That was what I found myself thinking, during our third outing, as I glanced at her shadowy profile next to me in the darkness of a cinema at Scala. Now I wonder if it wasn’t so much Ditte herself as how alike I thought we were that drew me to her. (Or perhaps that is the essence of attraction: a longing to see something of oneself in another.) Like looking into an enchanted mirror: when I looked at her, I saw a Dane who looked like me. I remember, one night, we lay face to face and gazed wordlessly into each other’s eyes until Ditte broke the spell by bursting into laughter. In bed, she was very clear about what she wanted, what she didn’t want, how she felt, and how she wanted to feel, demonstrating the same thoroughness she had shown in the classroom. Her scent, the consistency of her hair, the color of her nipples—everything about her was at once strange and familiar. When she told me that she had never used deodorant because she didn’t have to, I knew exactly what she was talking about. I had never bought a stick of deodorant in my life, though I had carried one around and even pretended to use it all through my upper-secondary years, so that I wouldn’t stand out among the other kids at my boarding school. A look of recognition seemed to dawn in her gaze when I told her about my constant need to prove myself when meeting new people. In retrospect, I’m not sure what these shared moments of understanding and complicity meant to her. Did they mean anything at all?

We were together for almost four months, during which time we explored Copenhagen as if for the first time, with new eyes. I had never noticed all the busts, bas-reliefs and other three-dimensional representations scattered throughout the city, which we baptized “the city of statues” because the statues outnumbered the inhabitants, joked Ditte. She had grown up in Esbjerg, in West Jutland, and spent part of every summer on Fanø, where her parents had a summer home overlooking the Wadden Sea. I had grown up in the Whiskey Belt, just north of Copenhagen, my summers punctuated by fishing trips with my father to the Faroe Islands. She loved salted black licorice, the typical Scandinavian kind. Before bed, I used to steal mine from the cabinet where my mother kept it in a glass jar shaped like a Swedish Dalecarlian horse. We both loved having øllebrød for breakfast; observing the sky on bright summer nights when dusk seems to go on forever; watching old Danish television dramas like “Jeg kan ikke vente til mandag!” and “Olive og Tom.”

Perhaps a part of me already knew it couldn’t last, the theory of compatibility that I had constructed like scaffolding around us, and whose fragile symmetry I marvelled at in secret. We were too alike, I remember thinking; it wasn’t normal to be this close to someone in so short a time, like skipping to the end of a book one has been reading too fast from the start. But the mirror at last reflected someone back at me. Around that time, I had a strange dream. In it, Ditte was my sister, the two of us separated at birth, and, although I knew such a thing to be impossible—my blood was Japanese, hers was Korean, after all—I woke in the dark with an erection, my heart beating like a tam-tam. I was alone in my bed; Ditte had gone back to her hall of residence at some point during the night without waking me. When we saw each other again, I made the mistake of telling her about my dream. Though I had left out the part about my erection, bewilderment and disgust clouded her face, as if I had laid bare some unspeakable fantasy. She asked me if that was how I had always seen her. The thought of an incestuous relationship with a long-lost sister had never crossed my mind, I said, but Ditte refused to believe me.

Things were never the same after that. One day, she informed me of her intention to spend the weekend in Esbjerg, where her parents still lived. We had often talked about going together, but the trip had never materialized. The following night, I received a phone call; in the background I heard voices, music, as though she had called me from a party. She seemed distracted or irritated by something. We ended the conversation without saying goodbye. I eventually learned that she had left me for her thesis supervisor, who also happened to be my thesis supervisor. After that, I couldn’t walk past certain places—the statue of Adam Oehlenschläger near the zoo in Norske Allé, the skating rink in Nørrebro Park, even the oil tanks at Prøvestenen—without being reminded of her. The worst was going to see my thesis supervisor. I couldn’t be sure, but it seemed that the man had no idea about me and Ditte. He was out of shape, dark-haired (for a blond Dane), and his chin receded a bit. Other than his vast and bottomless intelligence, his daggerlike wit, his impressive list of publications, what could she possibly see in him? And that was when I realized that I had never really known her, any more than I had known the adopted Korean girls before her. She had become a name to add to the others. All this time, I had thought of her as a mirror, a strange and beguiling reflection, but it would seem that she had been drawn to me because I was different, a change from all the Danes she had previously dated.