Around the Corner You Can’t See Around
===
Lore Segal
===
Ladies’ Lunch over and talk for the moment exhausted, we continued to sit around the table by the window that overlooked the Hudson River, to sip our wine, pour ourselves another glass. It was here that Bridget asked what everybody thought about this idea of “finding oneself.” “Is there a character in Homer, in Shakespeare, in the Bible who thinks to ask, ‘Who am I?’ ” And the conversation was off again.

“Besides Lear,” Farah said, “who asks ‘Who is it that can tell me who I am?’ And don’t you love the question ‘Who does he think he is’ or ‘Who do you think you are’ followed by a rhetorical exclamation point?”

Lucinella’s chair faced east. She had been watching people on the neighboring rooftop, and she said, “They’re having a party, and they didn’t invite me!”

“Do you know those people?” Ruth asked her.

“No,” Lucinella said.

Ilka said that her search began with her grandmother Ilonka, the one she was named for. “She died before I was born, but I’ve seen an old sepia photograph—two photographs, actually, taken by someone standing outside the open door to her bedroom. Great Aunt Mali used to let me play with—what did they call it?—the stereopticon, on Sunday afternoons when my mother’s cousins used to get together in Mali’s apartment just outside Vienna. I don’t think I remember my father being there. Tante Mali was immensely fat and old, with a sweet, lovely face. She and little Onkel Maxl ended up in Mauthausen. The magic of the stereopticon made the flower in a water glass on the bedside table, made the glass, three-dimensional and more real than the sepia grandmother sitting up in her crocheted bed jacket.”

Lotte frowned irritably when she said, “I will never understand why something made to look three-dimensional or virtual excites us more than the real thing in front of our noses. . . .”

“Mimesis,” Farah said. “Is it Aristotle or is it me who said that we like a likeness, in which, I guess, we search for ourselves?”

Ilka was following her own thought: “The room is lit from the left, so there must be a window in the corner that one can’t see around. Secrets of the sepia bedroom: someone picked that flower and put water into the water glass; someone had set the glass on the bedside table. . . .”

“That’s what I mean!” Lotte said. “What does it tell us about who we are that we are tenderly intrigued by an imaginary person walking through an old photograph but couldn’t care less about our neighbor passing our window at this very moment?”

“My mother found Ilonka’s old ice skates,” continued Ilka. “The grandmother in the bed jacket ice-skating blew my mind. I mean, when were skates even invented?”

Ruth consulted her smartphone. She said, “In 3000 B.C.”

“Look!” Lucinella said. “Look! The people on the roof! They’re bringing out the cake. It’s a birthday party.”

“Birthdays,” Bessie said. “People talk of the pathos of having missed their own, or their kid’s birthday, or graduation. Tell me one thing that ever signified at a birthday party, a graduation, at Thanksgiving, a Seder, a wedding even—”

“A funeral,” Farah said.

Ruth said, “Next Ladies’ Lunch will be at my place. The agenda: Tell some one thing that has thrown light on Who You Are.”

The next time the friends met, around Ruth’s table, Ilka read them what she had written about the morning she woke in her first English foster home, in 1938: “There, on a chest of drawers, was the suitcase my mother had packed for me. I lay in the strange bed and wondered what I was supposed to do. Presently I got up, I dressed slowly, and opened the door to the hallway. Where were all the people? The previous night there had been an old woman and her daughter who had fetched me from the station and brought me to this house where all the lights were on in all the rooms and a lot of smiling people stood around looking at me. A maidservant in a long white apron had taken me upstairs to the bathroom and run a bath. I understood that she meant me to get in, but I was ashamed and wouldn’t undress, and in the morning I could not remember having been brought up to this bedroom. I stepped out into the hallway and listened to the silence. A door stood ajar. I looked inside and saw a dressing table. A mirror, with photographs stuck into the frame, reflected a brush, a comb, and a pincushion in the shape of a heart. I gave the door what I told myself might have been an accidental push. It revealed the corner of somebody’s bed covered with a shiny green counterpane. I knew that I must not walk into other people’s bedrooms—should not be looking in. Was I allowed—was I meant—to use these stairs? I crept down to the next floor where there were a number of doors, but all of them were shut.”

“Bedrooms,” Bessie said. “It was Robbe-Grillet, if you please, who showed us that we were part of the room’s geography before we were able to give an account of the color of the wall or form a relationship with this or that piece of furniture. Try it! Imagine yourself into bed in your first bedroom; notice that you know the direction your feet are pointing, and you remember the location of the door in relation to the window.”

“And you define yourself as the who who inhabited that first bedroom?” Ruth asked her.

“Why do I have to define myself?” Bessie asked.

Ilka said, “Well, I am the refugee who tells the old story.”

“And I,” Lucinella said, “am the uninvited.”

“No, you’re not,” Lotte said. “You are here at the Ladies’ Lunch. But why am I the person at the party who argues with everything anybody says?”

“And I,” Farah said, “am the one who brings up the things nobody is interested in thinking about.”

“And you,” Ruth said to Bridget, “it’s you who got us asking ourselves who we are. What do you say?”

“That there isn’t any Who,” Bridget said. “I think it’s a silly question.”